Williamson and Jenny Harris I'd like to
welcome you to today's briefing I'm
joined by Jenny Harry's the deputy chief
medical officer he'll be sharing with
you the latest detailed data on
coronavirus on any normal Sunday
afternoon many of you would have been
out with your family and friends
enjoying the sunshine and tomorrow many
children would be going to school for
the first time after a two-week break
but these are not normal times and we're
asking you to stay at home so can I
start by thanking you for all the
sacrifices that you've already had to
make and that you continue to make I
know this has not been easy but it is
the surest way that we have to protect V
NHS and to save lives
I can report through the government's
ongoing monitoring and testing program
as of today four hundred and eighty two
thousand and sixty three test for
coronavirus have been carried out in
Great Britain including 21 thousand six
hundred and twenty six tests carried out
yesterday a hundred and twenty thousand
and sixty seven people have tested
positive that's an increase of five
thousand eight hundred and fifty cases
since yesterday eighteen thousand one
hundred and eighteen people are
currently in hospital with coronavirus
in the UK compared to eighteen thousand
and six on the 17th of April and sadly
of those hospitalised with the virus
sixteen thousand and sixty have now died
there's an increase of five hundred and
ninety six five fatalities since
yesterday we mustn't forget that behind
every single status
stick there is a heartbreaking story and
my sincere condolences go out to
everyone who has lost someone that they
love these are challenging times for all
of us
and each of us has a role to play in
fighting this virus those who are
working in the NHS those doctors those
nurses there's clean as those porters
those ambulance crews they're all doing
an amazing job they're truly heroic in
the part that they're playing and
supporting every one of us in this
nation but today I would also like to
say how enormous ly grateful we are for
those who are working in our nurseries
schools colleges universities and
Children Services and profoundly
grateful for the vital role they're
providing in our communities they've
been keeping schools and nurseries open
including over the Easter holidays so
there's our most vulnerable children and
children of critical workers can
continue to be supported and they can be
cared for people were anxious to know
when we're going to relax relax
restrictions when schools are likely to
be fully back and open again of course I
want to nothing more than to see schools
back get them back to normal
make sure that children a sat around
learning and experiencing for joy of
being at school but I can't give you a
date because before we do we need to
meet five tests first we must protect
the NHS's ability to cope and be sure
that it can continue to provide critical
care and specialist treatment right
across the whole of the United Kingdom
second we need to see daily death rates
from coronavirus coming down third we
need to have reliable data that shows
the rate of infection is decreasing to
manageable levels fourth
we need to be confident that testing
capacity and PPE is being managed with
supply able to meet not just today's
demand but future demand and fifth and
perhaps most crucially we need to be
confident that any changes we do make
will not risk a second peak of
infections when we can be sure that we
have met these five essential points we
can think about getting children into
schools again learning mastering new
ideas and being with their friends once
more will work with a sector to consider
how best to reopen schools nurseries and
colleges when the time is right our
first priority has always been
protecting the well-being of children
and young people but particularly those
vulnerable young people with special
educational needs or a social worker
schools are open for them and we're
working to make sure those who should
attend do so places are available for
children of critical workers - with up
to 130,000 children in school every
single day schools are helping to keep
the country moving and we're asking our
local authorities and schools to ensure
every vulnerable child knows that their
school is there to support them their
systems are in place to keep in touch
with those children who are unable to
attend because of health reasons I know
that families of seriously ill and
disabled children are particularly
worried at this time and I'm grateful to
all staff who are working so hard to
support their education health and care
particularly those in special schools
and residential care homes young people
who have left care or just about to
whether that's from a foster family or
residential care
really vulnerable right now so I'm
asking local authorities to ensure that
no one has to leave care during this
difficult time for 1.6 billion pounds of
additional funding announced yesterday
will help local authorities give care
levers and other vulnerable groups for
support that they need at this difficult
time to further protect children from
harm we're continuing to support child
line and working with the NSPCC to
expand and promote the adult help
helpline by providing them with an extra
1.6 million pounds this means children
have someone to call and more adults
will be able to raise concerns and seek
advice about the safety and well-being
of any child that they're worried about
like the rest of a population all our
teachers have had to adapt very quickly
to new ways of working they've had to
move resources online work remotely
change the way they support their
students as well as one another I'm
immensely grateful to them and to
everyone who has offered their support
including those who have made resources
freely available for schools parents and
pupils to use we have already published
a initial list of high quality online
educational resources including how to
support physical and mental well-being
and materials for teaching children with
special educational needs and
disabilities and yet another example of
how we are at our best when we work
together some of our leading state
schools have collaborated to open the
oak national academy which will be
launched online tomorrow this is a
totally new initiative led by 40
brilliant teachers who have a semble
video lessons and resources for any
teacher in the country to make use of if
they wish to do so
180 video lessons will be
I did each week across a broad range of
subjects for every year group from
reception through to year 10 I
recognized all the challenges that
families will be facing at the moment
and we determine to support parents who
are helping their children learn from
home I think we all know how difficult
that can be
but BBC has developed resources for
families as part of the most
comprehensive education package in the
BBC's history available on TV and online
from tomorrow morning and to make sure
as many children as possible can access
online learning we're ordering laptops
to help disadvantaged young people who
set key exams next year will also
provide laptops and tablets for those
children with social workers and care
leavers to help them stay in touch with
the services they need keeping them safe
as well as supporting home learning and
if disadvantaged secondary school school
pupils and care leavers who are
preparing for exams do not already have
internet connections will provide free
4G Reuters to get them connected while
schools are closed we're also working
with major telecommunications providers
to exempt certain educational resources
from data charges so that this does not
add to household expenses that may
already be very stretched at this moment
before I finish I'd like to applaud the
remarkable way our education community
has responded to this outbreak and the
normally proud and inspired by the
incredible spirit they are showing
schools are supporting their communities
in every way from preparing food parcels
to sharing their facilities with local
hospitals colleges are manufacturing and
donating equipment and universities are
working flat
to develop diagnostic tests and of
course a vaccine which will help us beat
this invisible enemy and to any young
people watching I wanted to say to you
how sorry I am
that you've been disrupted you've had
your education disrupted in this way I
know how hard it must be and I'd like to
thank you for making the adjustments
that you've had to make I know that
you'll be missing your friends your
teachers your lessons and I want you to
know that you are such an important part
of this point too and I cannot thank you
enough for all that you are doing this
global pandemic is the biggest threat to
our country it's the biggest threat that
this country has faced in modern times
if we all continue to work together as
we have been and if we continue to stick
to the advice of our experts we will
come out the other side and be able to
begin the task of rebuilding our
communities I'd like now to hand over to
Jenni and then we will take some
questions and so I'm just going to talk
briefly through four slides which many
of you I know will be very familiar with
but just to highlight the hard work
actually that you as the public have
achieved and the projection ahead as we
see it so the first slide is indicative
of the social distancing measures we've
all been working hard to achieve and I
think we need to congratulate ourselves
but also maintain these measures as we
go forward to ensure that we keep
control of the pandemic as it is this
slide shows that since February there
has been a more than sixty percent a
drop in are used to transport overall
transport types and particularly in rail
and tube recognizing that it's our just
our essential workers who are going to
work at the moment and
usage on that is down by 95% the not
we've had a little blip if you like over
the Easter period where people have been
at home anyway and those normal levels
and excuse me normal levels if you like
for pandemic status are now resumed so I
think a lot of really good work but work
that we need to continue excitement and
again we usually look at the number of
UK cases which have been confirmed these
are reported when lab tests are
completed it may come a little time
after the initial laboratory tests and
what you can see here is a rise in the
cases that we reported through March and
although there is some variation on a
day to day basis in general there is a
trend for the number of cases to be
plateauing out now and that is despite
increased testing capacity and that I
think is reflective of the distant
social distancing measures that we've
had booed are also reflected in our
Hospital data as well next slide please
and this slide shows you the number of
people in hospital over the time period
since around the middle of March there's
a few dips in this which we recognize
from data collection for example around
the early phase in April but you need to
look at the general trend across the
picture and for London particularly it
demonstrates not only the very
significant amount of work that our
hospitals have been doing particularly
around the start first and second week
of April but also the success which is
occurring now in the number of cases
coming down over time now again there
will be variation as we go forward we
shouldn't be looking at specific day to
day variation but it is the trend in
that period equally you can see that
other parts of the country have had
slightly different pressures on their
systems
it is really important that those areas
continue to practice social distancing
so that their hospital systems as well
remain fully able as they are now with
significant capacity in critical care
and in normal bed utilization to manage
all of the patients who need hospital
care that's life and then the the last
slide here is around our global death
comparison again this is one which as a
public health specialist epidemiologist
is one which we need to reflect back on
many months ahead
in actual fact because of the difference
in the way which different countries and
different systems collect data but we
want to be able to show you what is
happening in the UK and how that relates
as far as we possibly can to other
countries and you can see there are two
lines on this one the UK hospital only
data this is very robust data which is
readily accessible and you can see that
blue line progressing on the right but
we like to think is starting to even out
a little bit and then you will see to
the left of the slide a UK all settings
data line which is reflecting the fact
that we have a lag if you like between
our community death reporting and this
endeavors to try and display in line
with some other countries recording
mechanisms how the UK is managing to
that extent thank you thank you have so
much Jenny I think the first question
that we've got is from Hugh Pym at the
BBC
thank you can you comment on reports
today that stocks of PPE
were allowed to run down in the couple
of years before the pandemic and why was
more not done to get hold of more PPE in
March and early February including using
British companies well what we've seen
when that what we've seen over the last
few months is an enormous effort it's a
national effort but it's also an
international effort to secure PPE from
right around the globe but we've seen so
many brilliant British businesses
repurpose themselves in order to be able
to provide us and we've seen many
educational settings also been able to
do it well you know the government from
the first moment that we were in a
situation where the scientific advice
was highlighting to us that we were
facing a real challenge in terms of a
coronavirus and this could potentially
evolve into a pandemic every resource of
government has been deployed to not just
expanding what we need in terms of PPE
but also ventilators and we've seen a
massive growth in the number of
ventilators that we have available in
our hospitals and keep adding and
building to the stock of what we've got
I'm not sure Jenny if there's anything
extra on PPE that you wanted to add
happy to and so I think we perhaps ought
to just step back a little bit and start
from the beginning of this which is the
UK regardless of the position that we
may be in now or commentary has been an
international exemplar in preparedness
so the fact that there is a pandemic
influenza stockpile is considered a very
high quality mark of a prepared country
in international terms what we have has
as Secretary of State has said and many
others have noted is a huge demand on
our supply and I think we have had if if
I might say from my own professional
perspective we could perhaps have a more
adult and more detailed conversation
about PPE supplies for example quite
rightly the conversation at the moment
is very much focused on gown supplies
earlier in earlier weeks I'm very aware
of consideration of eyewear for example
in goggles and masks and I think it is
important to remember that although
there may be elements of distribution
problems across the UK at different
times and in different places this is a
huge pull on services which we have
never seen before and we have managed
actually despite signaling
many potential shortfalls to continue to
supply going forward and even as I stand
here I know with the gang position for
example that even though when orders go
in overseas supplies may be very
different what is received to what we
think we're going to get we have worked
right across the UK to try and manage
those supplies based predominantly and
always on a risk mitigation method so
this is about
whichever patient or whichever
healthcare worker at highest risk across
the UK requires those PPE and I think we
perhaps need to rather than lumping all
of the PPE together which is not an a
homogeneous mix at all we just need to
think carefully through what has been
achieved and the challenges which are
acknowledged ahead q further questions
quick follow-up oaky course yes please
yeah I mean some companies are still
saying even this weekend they want to
make and supply the PPE they're offering
it but people at the centre are either
not replying or just not coming back to
them I mean we've seen over the last few
weeks a massive increase in the amount
of resources have been put in terms of
providing PPE and a billion extra items
of PPE have been brought into this
country and we recognize to support our
NHS support those care homes we need to
be looking at every way that we can
bring in more I would sort of I know
that the health secretary and Innova
Cabinet Office are doing immense work
trying to find British suppliers so I
would encourage them to through yourself
to be able to make sure we pick those
out and we make sure that we get in
contact with them over the next 24 hours
if they sort of in any way slip through
the net we we recognize this is a
national endeavor and we're so
incredibly grateful for so many people
who are willing to step forward and make
a real difference and we certainly don't
want to miss out on those opportunities
so please do send that information to us
and we'll make sure that we chase those
up within the next 24 hours thank you
ever so much here
if we go to Dan Huot at ITV Dan please
and first of all a question to both of
you really and the NHS Confederation
which represents hospitals as today told
ITV News it would support any doctor or
nurse who refused to go to work because
they feared they weren't able to access
the correct PPE are they right to back
them would you both personally be
comfortable today working on a coded
ward having to reuse what's meant to be
single-use PPE and secondly it's the
Secretary of State on the 30th of
January the World Health Organization
declared a global health emergency Boris
Johnson didn't attend a single Cobra
meeting until over a month later on
March the second what was he doing in
the meantime that was more important and
is it acceptable that he was being
briefed rather than attending any of
those meetings yeah that's it so don't
think you ever so much for that so if I
maybe pick up for the latter half of
that question and Jennie will may be
able to sort of be able to speak a
little bit more on for PPE side of
things as well for Prime Minister from
the moment that it became clear that
there were challenges in terms of
coronavirus developing in in China has
absolutely been leading our nation's
effort to combat the corona virus making
sure that resources and money is not an
issue or a concern for any department
especially health service in terms of
dealing with this and as you well know
and I know as an experienced journalist
you're very aware of this many Cobra
meetings take place and I've spent many
hours attending cobra meetings where
it's actually led by the departmental
minister but the focus that the Prime
Minister was putting on this and can
just continue to put on this as meant
that this is the whole government effort
we're making sure that we do everything
that is required and everything that is
needed to make sure that we protect the
NHS and make sure that we save lives and
that is the government's policy and that
is what the Prime Minister has been
driving right from the start and when
there are those initial concerns about
this development of this virus journey
I'm not sure if you'd like to pick up
one yes happy to and
so I think I'm not going to comment on
behalf of the NHS Confederation I'm
going to comment as a healthcare
professional if I happen to be working
on the frontline today I have a
responsibility to look after patients to
the best of my ability to protect my
colleagues and my staff and to manage my
practice safely so all of those in the
current climate will mean that I need to
understand the agreed guidance on PPA
which has been agreed with all of the
Royal Medical Colleges and to implement
that whenever I can
I think this use and it goes back to my
comment earlier to Hugh Pym it's very
easy to make a throwaway comment about
single-use PPE some PPE is single use
some PPE that has previously been used
in different diseases in different
settings may be single-use but we have
very detailed guidance now about what
PPE should be used in which settings it
is actually quite complex which is why
as a professional I think there is a
responsibility on me to understand that
and it is the fact that we are in a
global shortage whether we are in the UK
or whether we are internationally
actually we all need to use this PPE
carefully so I think it's really
important when you say I mean obviously
we can't do a description here but if
there was a particular intervention some
sessional use is entirely appropriate so
for example wearing again for sessional
use with a disposable plastic apron on
top of it is an entirely appropriate use
of PPE and in that example you can see
there is one element of what some people
may call reuse and one element of what
some call may call single-use so it's
really important not just to consider an
item of PPE outside a particular care
setting but really be careful to apply
that so and I think that's what all
professionals will want to do down I'm
not sure if you want to follow up
question at all yeah on the piece
P issue we know that the the light from
Turkey bringing in supplies that Robert
Jenna announced yesterday has been
delayed even if that the right today we
know that that only would have supplied
NHS for a matter of days so what's
taking place between now and this time
next week or next Friday to ensure that
NHS trusts aren't going into yet another
weekend facing the prospect of running
out of certain items of PPE I think I
think down and it's a very important
question that you raised I think we all
recognize we enormous strain that's been
placed on the whole system and we also
recognize that right across the globe
people are actually trying to get the
same items of PPE from quite a limited
number of suppliers I think it's
important to thank the Royal Air Force
that's on standby in order to make sure
that this equipment is brought from
Turkey and we hope to see that coming
into the country hope to see that coming
into the country tomorrow but we do
recognize that we need to be working
constantly in order to be able to boost
supplies this is why we brought in Lord
Dayton in order to spearhead the
government's response and actually
coordinating the actions that we want to
be taking in order to make sure our NHS
staff have everything that they want we
don't want to see anyone in a setting
that doesn't have the equipment that
they need to do their job
just to add some sort of real practical
tangibility to that and there is a cross
government board which meets I'm part of
that board to ensure as I've said from
the start that clinical prioritization
is there and when I say clinical it is
not just across the NHS it is around
social care sector and other parts of
the system which need PPE as well so for
example a funeral parlor staff for
example but in the right proportions and
we work across the UK to ensure that
each group of staff is prioritized
according to that need the Health
Minister is updated on a daily basis on
some quite detailed information about
PPE run rates and flow rates and we look
ahead all of the time
as I've said although there is massive
ordering ongoing it's not always
possible to predict that the order that
we think is going to arrive actually
appears in quite the same proportions
and content as we planned and obviously
that is an ongoing monitoring activity
there are meetings going on two or three
times a day on a daily basis thank you
ever so much done and next we go to Liz
Bates search channel for Liz please
hello yeah I have two questions if I may
first of all see dr. Harris do you know
what the gap is in survival rates
between different hospitals across the
country and are you going to publish
that data set and what are you doing to
ensure best practice and secondly
another question on PPE
I mean you set out your position many
times we've also heard many stories of
health workers without the proper
equipment that they need can you say to
those people now that are going into a
day in day out risking their lives that
they will get the protective equipment
they need to keep themselves safe and
their family safe or should we expect
more cases of frontline health workers
without safety equipment that they need
well thank you ever so much Liz and just
on the latter part of your questions you
know a few weeks ago much of a debate
was about ventilators and the need for
more ventilators and there's concerns
about the Health Service as to whether
the health service would able to cope
and what you saw is a national effort to
make sure that we had enough ventilators
and what you're seeing in terms of PPE
is very much a national effort to make
sure we do that we recognize that we
need to be backing up those so many
amazing people not just within the
health service but more broadly right
across the country with the right levels
of PPE we are going to do everything we
can do to deliver for them we recognize
they're doing an incredibly important
job and every part of government but
every part of a nation is doing what it
can do to meet that journey I'm not sure
if you want to mention anything on
survival rates
yes perhaps just a question budget you
mentioned best practice was there a
particular element of best practice that
you had in mind just if there's any
particular strategy to promote best
practice and if the survival rates
between different hospitals are playing
into that are being used to develop that
okay so I think quite separately from
Kovac or anything else we have quality
monitoring programs effectively and we
have professional groups who will
monitor themselves as well so for
example doctors respiratory permissions
physicians or intensive care specialists
are forever comparing their data and
their practice in order to learn from
each other and that's not just in this
country that is from overseas as well so
there are particular elements of this
which I think at this stage are quite
difficult to tease out and I think we
will as we go forward you will see over
the coming months and years not just in
the UK but internationally as well a
whole number of research papers looking
and comparing to see what different
elements of practice have been
successful but obviously at this stage
we want to be identifying elements which
are successful and implementing those as
quickly as possible but being sure that
the evidence that we have actually says
that is the case and then if there are
differential rates for survival for
example and I'll just come back to that
in a moment then clearly we want to
identify any factors that would be
involved in that and to try and improve
them now it's a very very complex
picture at the moment so in terms of
best practice obviously you'll be aware
that there are a number of trials
running and that is a classic example of
trying to ensure that we have very
strong evidence as early as possible
it's been a very very rapid research
call and implementation and we will act
on results as that as soon of that as
soon as it's safe to do so in terms of
survival it's quite difficult because
every person who comes into the hospital
is an individual we're all very very
different
we were talking pretty
for example around ethnicity we know
that actually if you're male you're more
likely to come off more badly
we know that children appear to be less
affected we know that it's a risk if you
have other underlying condition so each
of those factors what we would make all
the confounding factor in our analysis
in terms of who survives and who doesn't
needs to be properly accounted for so
the short answer is yes and there are
there a data collection there's a
collection of data called ignc which
the intensive care consultants use
routinely and we'll be looking at it
there is specific data aligned with
kovat as well but it would be quite
early to say at the moment as soon as
there are any specific factors then
obviously we try and highlight those and
in fact one of the early elements that's
coming out of this and in fact a little
bit like flu is that obesity is actually
quite a risk factor as well so there's a
mixture of individual risk and how that
plays out within a hospital setting this
I'm not sure if there's anything further
to the three questions or have you got a
follow-up I just wanted to ask it did
sound like to you sexually say it did
sound like what you were saying on PPE
was we're trying our very very best but
we still can't really guarantee the
safety of every frontline health worker
we recognize that their key areas of
pressure within PPE and as as Jenny
touched upon the pressure points have
actually shifted over the last few weeks
in terms of what types of PP are
required we recognize as that we
recognize as a big pressure but I do
want to assure you and all your viewers
that we're doing absolutely everything
we can to bring as much PP right from
across the globe we recognize it's a big
challenge we recognize that we've got to
be supporting the people who are
supporting our nation in terms of the
health service and we'll continue to
focus on doing that if we can next go to
tomorrow Cohen from Sky tomorrow
education secretary
schools from what you said we're not
expecting schools to reopen in the
middle of May so parents and pupils are
preparing for many more months at home
we've spoken to teachers at schools
we're not a small minority but 30 or 40
percent of students have no computer at
home have a difficult home environment
in which to learn and teachers are
really worried about the long-term
implications of all this what are your
plans to prevent some of these children
falling behind permanently for example
do you expect schools to stay open over
the summer holidays and can I ask dr.
Jenny Harry's we're looking back
intensely at the period in February and
March where potentially not enough was
done to curb the spread of this epidemic
at the end of March when the World
Health Organization said their message
to countries was to test test test you
told us at the end of March that that
may not be an appropriate mechanism for
the UK do you now think that failure to
do more community testing was the wrong
approach tomorrow I think you raised a
really important point and it's
something that as education secretary I
worry about immensely of course you
always want as education secretary to
see schools full of children because you
know that children benefit so much from
being in school and I think that many
families right across the country are
learning about some of the challenges of
supporting their child in terms of home
education but you touch on that really
thorny issue sometimes of those children
that aren't getting for support from
home there may be those children who are
in care there may be those children who
suffer disadvantage I mean many of us
take it as a given that we have good
internet and IT facilities at home but
that just simply isn't the case for
every single child around the country
that's why we've announced this
package of measures to help some of
those children who are from that most
disadvantaged background because it is a
worry for me that those children from
that disadvantaged background are going
to fall behind they're going to struggle
to catch up that's why we're doing the
things that we're doing supplying them
with IT equipment within their home
helping and supporting them and also
helping and supporting schools to do
teach to do teaching in the home helping
those children to really succeed and we
recognize there's going to be a whole
raft of things this is you know schools
colleges nurseries and of course
governments need to come together in
order to be able to support those
children to really succeed in life I
don't want to see children falling
behind and now do absolutely everything
I can do to make sure that no child
whatever their background is falling
behind as a result of this crisis if I
can hand over to Jenny and yes thank you
I recognized that my commentary which
I'm actually going to stick with from
that period has been reinterpreted
several times I'm getting very used to
this I think at the time that that
statement was made many of the countries
around the world
did not know that they had a problem and
one of the reasons for w-h-o to be
reinforcing the importance of testing
was for countries to identify that there
was a problem that was not the case for
the UK we have we had and we still have
a very clear plan we had a containment
phase and it was very successful if you
remember we had planes coming in from
whoo-hooo and we quarantined people and
a very strict quarantine regimes from
high-risk areas we followed up
individual cases and families wherever
that was possible but once you end up
with seeding and cases which we
recognized across the community our
focus has to be and I still think this
is great on managing the clinical
conditions of
those individuals and we have continued
to do that in an area where in an ideal
world perhaps if you have endless
resources and I mean that in terms of
people I don't mean it in financial
terms but mechanisms for following
through testing contact tracing and
going on going on it's it's an important
approach to be considered but I think
what's interesting at the moment is the
UK continues to be compared with Germany
and there has been a lot of comparison
and we will continue to do that it's
very very important that we learn from
other countries but actually German
rates of disease are starting to rise
now we are still at different phases of
this pandemic in different countries and
the important thing I was look for or
what I'm trained to look for is to say
if I do this intervention what is it
that I think is going to happen what
evidence do I have that we would change
a course or alter that and I think we
have rather ended up with a conversation
which was a demanding on testing without
necessarily seeing that causal link the
bit that says if we do lots of testing
how does this play out there is an
assumption there and it's an important
one for us to investigate but I think
the the actual mechanism between the two
is still not clear and we must therefore
as you've indicated continue to look at
that as our cases drop if we have more
digital mechanisms potentially but again
fraught with difficulty I think in
implementation then there may be an
opportunity to use testing in a
different way - that that we use during
the containment period tomorrow I'm not
sure if there's any follow-up on those
two questions of course which is that
you didn't say whether schools would
need to stay open over the summer break
but if that is an option being
considered and also whenever schools end
up going back whenever the science
allows them to go back do you see it
being phased and do you believe any form
of social distancing is really feasible
in schools I think we recognise for
challenges of anyone who's a pair
trying to instill social distancing in
small children and we have to understand
really that sort of broad broad context
we are in a stage in terms of dealing
with this pandemic where there are an
awful lot of questions that sadly people
would love to have answers to but in
terms of how the virus develops we have
to see that there currently no plans to
have schools open over the summer period
and we haven't been working on plans to
have them open over the summer period
but what we are looking at is different
ways such as I touched upon earlier the
okk National Academy of actually how we
can provide resources for children right
across the country making sure that they
can have the ability to catch up on
their learning thank you ever so much
tomorrow if we can go to Hugo Guyot yeah
Hugo Thank You Secretary of State are
you looking at what's happening in
countries like Denmark where they've
tried things like staggering school day
reducing class sizes to allow schools to
reopen eventually on that but to do that
we've innovations that make them safer
places and dr. Harris you said just now
that testing is not necessarily the
reason by the UK has so much so many
more coronavirus deaths than many other
large countries do you know what the
reason is then why do you think the UK
has been so much worse than many other
large countries so if I touch upon four
pointers - are we looking at other
countries and learning from them
absolutely and we're seeing a few
examples of countries opening up their
schooling system and we'll look closely
as to how that works how that goes and
what lessons can be learned from it so
we can benefit from that journey and
thank you and so I think just to step
back about what I actually said I don't
think I quite said of the testing and
the deaths were directly linked what I
actually said was we have a difficulty
in understanding the variation
potentially between different countries
and what steps are there to be clear
what it is that may be causing variation
in patterns across the the country now
Germany stands out currently but again I
think we need to be very clear we need
to look back in 12 20 months time on
this Germany currently stands out as
different to other European countries
but in fact the UK is not sitting at the
the top of the European list if you like
of deaths at the moment it's really
important we understand what this means
counting deaths I know it's been it's a
sad thing to talk about and it's
something which has had a lot of focus
in the media recently but actually
probably the most useful statistic going
forward to compare between countries
would be what we call in all cause
mortality so it's actually looking to
say
what is the difference between now when
we have had a pandemic regardless of
what the individual has died from and
what we have had in previous years at
the same season and with an age
adjustment for that population and all
of those different things will vary
between different countries so it's very
difficult to draw direct comparisons
it's not an excuse it's a fact it's an
observation and if we don't do it very
carefully well we will go off into
patterns of exploration which actually
don't give us the answers that we need
to manage either this pandemic or
similar disease occurrences in the
future hugo is there any follow-up
questions that you may have just to
clarify
are you suggesting that it will take
again two years or more before any
realistic useful comparisons can be made
between countries I'm not arresting any
useful ones I mean obviously we do that
on on a daily basis the very fact that
we are talking here in this conversation
about Germany as one example and many
other countries as well
indicates that we are all very alert to
the fact that different countries may be
experiencing slightly different rates
what I am saying though is we need to be
very very careful about our comparisons
and take into account the age population
in a different country so Italy for
example appears to have been extremely
badly affected of in terms of death
rates but there are very different
family dynamics for example potentially
more multi-generational unit potentially
a higher proportion of the elderly all
sorts of different variables both in
population makeup and in the culture and
in how the Health Service manages and in
how public health interventions are
implemented so all of those need to be
taken into account before we jump on to
one side or another
thank you very much Hugo if we can go to
a Kate Devlin at the independent hello
to questions if I may cause asked this
morning if we were past the peak of the
virus one of the government's own
advisers sir Gerry Farah said yes do you
agree could we be past the peak and
secondly if I may
last week the independence or a leaked
email to NHS trusts which warned that a
sustainable supply of goings would not
be with them until mid-june will doctors
and nurses be facing a shortage of going
for another six weeks Oh Kate I think
you'll want for expert medical sort of
response in terms of whether we pass for
peekers against necessary for me but in
terms of PPE and gowns we recognise this
as a challenge and we recognize that
it's a global challenge but going back
to what I had said earlier the whole
resources of government and the whole
resources of a nation are really focused
in terms of dealing with that and making
sure that we have a gown supply that is
needed by our amazing NH
the work that they're doing within it if
I could ask Jenny to comment on the
issue in terms of repeat so I would be
very tempted to offer a comment on that
today but I'm not going to be for a
number of reasons I mean there is some
very good news in the sense that today
the UK deaths were down to 596 that was
from 888 yesterday we could jump to all
sorts of positive conclusions about that
but we shouldn't we should be extremely
guarded it's a weekend day we know that
hospitals will tend to report later on I
would anticipate those numbers will go
up tomorrow however and without actually
directly answering your question because
I would be much too cautious at this
point I do think it is fair to say that
we do know from the hospital data and
you've seen from the size earlier that
we are now starting to plateau across
and if I look at the number of patients
in patients diagnosed it doesn't mean
these are the total number of cases
across the UK but they are down by 30
percent let's say just on average moving
around on a daily basis from about 8 to
10 days ago so I think it's not fair to
say that we're past the peak and of
course the obvious statement to make is
if we don't keep doing the social
distancing we will create a second peak
and we definitely won't be past it so
this is no reason to consider that we
have managed this but I do think things
are looking to be heading in the right
direction okay is there a follow-up
question at all that you have for Jenny
or myself yes and I correct me if I'm
wrong in this Secretary of State but it
sounds like others today you cannot tell
doctors and nurses a date for when this
shortage of goings will be will be
solved and do you understand that's
incredibly worrying for them I very much
understand for worried that people would
have over this and this is why you know
we will be getting in the extra 400,000
gowns in
Turkey tomorrow we'll be making sure
that we are bringing further protective
equipment including gowns
all the way through because we want to
make sure that there is that continuous
supply but this is an incredibly fast
moving environment but every effort of
government every effort of NHS is being
put into making sure that they have that
continuous supply that our health
service quite rightly expects and needs
for those who are on the frontline thank
you very much if we can move to Amy
Gibbons from The Times Educational
Supplement good afternoon
education secretary should teachers
working in schools during the outbreak
have PPE well what we have done is we've
worked very closely with the whole
sector in terms of issuing advice as to
what type of protection that they need I
mean I have to say as someone who has
family members who are working in
schools as someone who very much sees
firsthand the amazing work that's been
done by teachers teaching assistants and
all that you know who are going into
schools at this time to make sure what
schools are open really in awe and
appreciation for what's being done but
their safety and is is absolutely
paramount as it is for children and
we've issued guidance we've worked with
a set to have explained what's needed
and what's required and being very clear
about that and we've asked public health
England to work with spoken directly
with unions as to what is required to
give them the reassurance that we're
doing everything that is required to
support teachers and all those who work
in schools I'm not sure if you've got a
follow up question at all and yes please
I wanted to ask what scientific advice
as the government received on safety
implications of reopening schools for
teachers so as I set out right at the
start
there are five key
that we have put forward as to they need
to be passed if we're going to be in a
position when we start changing
restrictions that we're currently
operating under we're already talking
with the sector as to what needs to be
done and how we support them for when we
start bringing schools back fully and
operation is would usually expect to see
schools
we're finally one of the key points we
also need to ensure is that people have
proper notice so they're able to prepare
whether that's teachers and those who
are working in schools but it's also
about parents and children those
families who have having to deal with
the consequences of this pandemic and
making sure that they have enough notice
in order to be able to plan but at every
stage we've tried to give us clear and
comprehensive guidance about the safety
of those who work in schools and of
course those children who are in schools
I'm not sure Jenny if you have anything
to say about the sort of safety of those
who are working in schools yes so I mean
right at the start of of the pandemic
and the implementations that we
considered if schools had been unsafe
places they would have been closed very
much earlier on and I think we need to
keep that in mind
schools are really important places for
for learning and for socialising but
they were not a key element of risk if
you like in the early modelling work
which was which was done as we go
forward we need to be really careful
we're in a different context so
obviously what what was when we first
started off we need to change and we
need to look at what change changing an
intervention will result in what outcome
for our population and one of the key
issues with children thankfully we do
know that they seem to be less severely
affected by this but we still have a
huge amount to learn about the virus
generally in terms of its transmission
and that is particularly the case in
children so I think there is a lot there
is still a lot of learning we will be
looking at that again as I've mentioned
with other responses we continuously
keep an eye on international evidence
where other countries have looked at
similar things and the scientific
advisory group for emergencies will
continue to to look at that as well
thank you very much Amy and and if we go
finally to catch sandeman from they're
not too composed get Thank You Secretary
of State's the the lack of PPE in social
cares has been a critical issue in
Nottingham as it has around the country
our local resilience for and received
forty percent of what it was told to
expect in its first delivery and the
leader of Natyam City Council has said
that it's been haphazard and inadequate
and essentially said that promises made
by the government have been broken do
you think there's a there's a argument
that you've over promised on on delivery
of PPE and secondly when the shipments
of PPE from Turkey does arrive can you
tell us how it's going to be distributed
and allocated and whether social carry
is going to be put on an equal footing
to the NHS well if I before I go answer
those questions if I can just take the
opportunity to thank two brilliant
universities in the city of Nottingham
who have been playing an incredibly
important role in terms of dealing with
the coronavirus crisis whether that's
the University of Nottingham and
Nottingham Trent University who have
actually lent key testing equipment in
order to boost the nation's capacity and
also to do tests but also are working in
terms of a mapping of a coronavirus so
we can best understand to Treatise and
really the city of Nottingham goes to
show showing the light as to what an
important role higher education
institutions play in terms of our battle
with the coronavirus and you raised an
important point and that important point
in terms of those social care settings
those homes and right at the start we
recognise that local resilience forums
which Nottingham City Council is
actually
and a key player as part of and she are
vital in making sure that we get the
distribution right on PPE so when we're
bringing more PPE into the country and
when it's been manufactured in this
country we using local resilience forums
as a key element to making sure that the
right type of equipment is getting into
care homes and many other such settings
and that will certainly be the case and
making sure the right equipment gets to
the right places and local resilience
forms will play a key role in that I'm
not sure if you would like to add
anything at all thank you sexual states
so I think perhaps what isn't evident
just from discussing PPE generally is
just how complex the distribution system
is and that represents the fact that as
you've highlighted the care sector are
really critical in their response and
that's not just the care sector in care
homes it is individual care workers
working on a domiciliary basis on an
individual client's home as well and
that poses challenges in itself so if
you like on the one hand there are quite
well established or were at the start of
this process Hospital drop systems we
have had to develop much broader ones to
reach right out to the care sectors more
generally but even so and the secretary
state has said the LRS actually are
extremely critical in scooping up if you
like an opportunity for us to ensure
that we can reach those very small care
homes independent care homes or
individual care workers who might not
otherwise feature in some of the bigger
national planning so they are a critical
component of this and I do know that
there have been two drops out two at
ahrefs recently there is another there
are two more the first drop three
planned for tomorrow the 20th of April
and hopefully another one actually the
same day a fourth drop so these are
ongoing so the LRS who have experienced
receipt of PPA it doesn't mean that this
is forgotten it's on an ongoing basis
but going back to some of my earlier
comments it is also real
important that we don't just drop a
certain amount of stuff in PPE in one
area or a few areas where lrx can use it
and leave others with frontline staff
unsupported so it is inevitable but
where there are potential shortage
supplies internationally we want to do
more frequent rocks to ensure that
critical staff on the frontline are
given the right equipment and have that
and that inevitably means there will be
smaller quantities over shorter periods
of time until individual PPE lines
stabilize case is there anything further
that you'd like to ask yeah just just on
the reopening of schools if I could of
course it's the timing of that dependent
on you feeling that schools have an
adequate supply of cleaning materials
hand sanitizer and that sort of thing
and if so what guidelines are being
drawn up to give to the schools and the
Trust's to make sure that those schools
can be as safe as possible for parents
and children and staff when they when
they do eventually we are kit we've
already issued an awful lot of guidance
on this and it's available on the Google
UK website there's if you want to be
able to access and I can organize for
someone to be able to send you a link in
terms of how we've been advising schools
in order to deal with the challenges
because we mustn't forget many thousands
of schools have continued to remain open
over the last few weeks in order to be
able to support vulnerable children and
the children of critical care workers as
well so but will constantly update that
advice and but I have touched upon the
fact that the key elements as to when
the decision is to open schools will be
when those five tests that were set out
by the first secretary of state at the
end of last week when they're met then
we're in a position to look at how we
change the restrictions that were
currently operating under well I'd like
to take the opportunity to thank
everyone for taking the time to tune in
but also for making sure that they have
continued to adhere to the guidance of
the
government has issued making sure that
we protect our NHS and save lives thank
you very much and that's the end of
today's UK government briefing see the
headlines as they happen and watch BBC
News live in the app and get the full
story with BBC dovecote UK forward slash
news follow the story for all the latest
with BBC News